README.adoc, before:

= dcs-master - Digital Combat Simulator cockpit integration server

dcs-master is a plugin to 
https://www.digitalcombatsimulator.com[Digital Combat Simulator] that provides a network
socket through which aircraft gauge data and other information is exported and
through which aircraft instruments and controls can be controlled. This implementation
aims to achieve the following:

* It should be easy to add support for new aircraft without extensive coding. Most of the
  gauge (game output) and controls (input) are already described in the DCS game files in a structed
  machine readable format. This information is utilized as much as possible to avoid manual
  programming of the same information.
* A simple to use network protocol that can easily be integrated with various client software.
  This is achieved by sending all data as https://json.org[JSON]. If a more compact data format
  is needed, then support for http://cbor.io[CBOR] can easily be added, since JSON can be encoded
  as CBOR.
* Avoid sending more data than needed. This is achieved by allowing the client to request which
  parameters should be exported, at what maximum frequency and with which precision (per gauge).
  Data is only
  sent when the information changes at the requested precision. For example, the indicated
  airspeed (IAS) is within the game a floating point number that in practice changes for each
  rendered frame in the game. In most cases, it is sufficient for the client software to know
  the IAS without decimals, for example, at the resolution of 1 km/h or 1 knot. If the IAS stays
  with that one km/h then an update of the IAS is not sent to the client.
* Keep the server side implementation fairly simple.

== DCS cockpit information

Aircraft cockspits in DCS are described in the DCS installation folder 
(typically `C:\Program Files\Eagle Dynamics\DCS World\`) in the 
`Mods\aircraft\<aircraft name>\Cockpit\Scripts\` folder.

The cockpits consist of the following elements:

Devices::
The devices of the aircraft. Taking the F/A-18C as an example, separate devices are the Up Front Controller (UFC),
 the armament computer and the environmental control system. The devices are listed in the `devices.lua` file.
Commands::
The _devices_ are controlled via _commands_. Each device typically has several
commands. These represent the buttons and switches
on the devices. For example, the UFC has a number keyboard and several other
buttons. Each button is a command. The commands are listed in the `command_defs.lua` file.
The main panel::
The main panel is a also a device, but is special, in that it contains all
the gauge and other output information. This includes the position of knobs
and switches. There are no commands associated with the main panel device.
The main panel gauges are listed in the `mainpanel_init.lua` file which also
includes the `MainPanel\lamps.lua` file where on/off style indicators are listed. 
 
Devices and commands are numbered. The main panel is always device 0. So we have this structure:

* Devices
** Device 0: Main panel
*** Gauge 1
*** Gauge 2
*** Gauge n
** Device 1
*** Command 1
*** Command 2
*** Command n
** Device n
*** Command 1
*** ...

Internally to the game the status of all gauges and commands are represented
as floating point values between -1.0 and 1.0 inclusive.

== The protocol 

WARNING: The protocol is not fully finalized yet and changes may still occur.

The protocol works by sending and receiving JSON arrays. The array must always be terminated by a new line character. This is to make parsing easier. The JSON arrays are exchanged over a TCP/IP session. By default the DCS master server plugin listens to port 4242, but this can changed in the LUA script. The first element of the JSON array is always the associated command defined by an integer. The general format is:
[source]
----
[<command>, <arg1>, <arg2>, ...]
----

Five _commands_ are currently implemented:

0:: The server reports the name of the currently controlled aircraft
1:: The client controls a device
2:: The client subscribes to gauge value changes, and the server sends gauge values
3:: The client subscribes to indicators (text output, which cannot be represented as number), and the server sends indicator values
4:: The client requests a list of all known indicators, and the server responds with the indicators

=== Command 0: Report currently controlled aircraft

Command 0 is automatically sent by the server to the client:

* Immediately when the client connects if an aircraft is controlled
* Immediately when the controlled aircraft changes

The format of the command is:
[source]
----
[0, "<aircraft>"]
----
The aircraft name is always as defined by DCS.

For example, when the the F/A-18C is controlled, the following is sent by the server to the client:
[source,json]
----
[0, "FA-18C_hornet"]
----

===  Command 1: Control a device

With command 1 you control devices in the aircraft, like pushing a button, flicking a switch, turning a knob or pulling a lever. The format of the command is:

[source]
----
[1, <device>, <command>, <value>]
----
Where:

<device> and <command>::
_Device_ and _command_ can either take an integer form or a string form. The integer form always works for any aircraft and for every device and command. This way any aircraft now and in the future can be controlled without any updates to the server software. To find the right device and command numbers, look in the DCS aircraft folder in the `devices.lua` and `command_defs.lua` files. To use the string form, the device and/or command must be defined in the aircraft specific JSON file in the dcs-master folder. To find the correct device and command names, look in this JSON file. The strings are not case sensitive, so you can capitalize them as you see fit. The names used are always as defined by DCS, even if they contain typos (as has happened), or if they are non-descriptive like "Button_42".
_<value>_::
The _value_ is always a floating point value between -1.0 and 1.0 inclusive. The value to send can most often be easily determined:

** On/off switches are 0, 1 and tri-state (down/middle/up) switches are -1, 0, 1.
** Multi-position rotational knobs are fractional numbers for the various positions _(Information on how to determine the fractions will be added.)_
** Encoders are fractional numbers of the amount to turn; positive for clockwise and negative for counter-clockwise 
** Analog controls can use the whole floating point range

==== Examples

To press and release the TCN button on the UFC in the F/A-18C, send:

[source,json]
----
[1, "UFC", "FuncSwTCN", 1]
[1, "UFC", "FuncSwTCN", 0]
----

To increase the RADAR altimeter warning position on the right vertical panel in the F/A-18C, send:

[source,json]
----
[1, "ID2163A", "ID2163A_SetMinAlt", 0.05]
----

And to decrease it:
[source,json]
----
[1, "ID2163A", "ID2163A_SetMinAlt", -0.05]
----

_Example of multi-position switch and other examples will be added._


=== Command 2: Subscribe to gauge values

With command 2 you subscribe the changes in the values of gauges, and receive the updated gauge values from the server. An update of the value of the gauge is sent by the server to the client when either of the following conditions occur:

* Immediately after the subscribe command has been sent by the client to the server, so the client gets a starting point
* When a value changes with the requested precision _and_ no more often than at the requested frequency

Note that gauges are any kind of indicators that can be represented by a numerical value. This includes on/off lights, analog gauges and digitally displayed values. 

==== Client to server

The format of the command is:
[source]
----
[2, <gaugename>, <id>, <precision>, <maxfrequency>]
----

Where:

<gaugename>::
The _gauge name_ can either take an integer form or a string form. The integer form always works for any aircraft and for every gauge. This way you can receive gauge information for any aircraft now and in the future without any updates to the server software. To use the string form, the device and/or command must be defined in the aircraft specific JSON file in the dcs-master folder. To find the correct device and command names, look in this JSON file. The strings are not case sensitive, so you can capitalize them as you see fit. The names used are always as defined by DCS, even if they contain typos.
<id>::
The _ID_ is an arbitrary integer number assigned by the client. This ID will be used the server when sending gauge value updates to the client. The purpose of the ID is to make it easy for the client to implement a lookup array to update the physical gauges. A typical client would start assign IDs starting from 0 and then incrementing by one for each gauge that it has interest in.
<precision>::
The _precision_ is an integer number defining with how many decimals precision the client is interested in receiving updates. This has an effect on both the update frequency and the precision in which the value is returned. The default value precision is 0, meaning whole integers. A precision of 1 decimal, means that an update is sent of the value changes by 0.1 or more; A precision of 2, means changes of 0.01 or more and so on. Negative numbers are also allowed. For example -1, means to report changes of 10 or more.
<maxfrequency>::
The _maximum frequency_ defines the maximum frequency at which an update will be sent. The default value is 10, i.e., an update is sent _at most_ ten times per second. If the value has not changed by more than the requested _precision_, then an update will not be sent no matter what the _maximum frequency_ is set at.

Both _<precision>_ and _<maxfrequency>_ are optional, but to set _<maxfrequency>_ you must also set _<precision>_. Most often you would keep _<maxfrequency>_ the same for all gauges in your cockpit and only change the _<precision>_ depending on the gauge type.

==== Server to client

Format:
[source]
----
[2, [<id>, <gaugevalue>], [<id>, <gaugevalue>], ...]
----

_Description will come._


=== Command 4: Subscribe to indicators

Indicators are gauges that and screens that show output that shows text and cannot be represented by numbers, for example the output on a text display. Indicators grouped
hierarchically within DCS. At the highest level are numbers, representing a device
within the cockpit. The device can several displays. For example, in the Hornet,
the UFC is device number 6, and the UFC has several displays. For an example of
all indicators of the Hornet see link:hornetindicators.json[hornetindicators.json].

If you don't know the number and name of the indicator you need, you can send 
command 5, explained later.

The format of the command is:
[source]
----
[3, <indicatornumber>, <indicatorname>, <id>]
----

Where:

<indicator_number>::
The indicator number of the device.

<indicatorname>::
The name of the indicator. Although the indicators are in a hierarchy, the 
indicator name is just the name of the actual indicator, without any intermediates.
For example the UFC scratch pad displays is on indicator device 6 and the full hierarchy
is UFC_MainDummy -> UFC_mask -> UFC_ScratchPadNumberDisplay. To get this value, you would
use an <indicatorname> of "UFC_ScratchPadNumberDisplay"

<id>::
The _ID_ is an arbitrary integer number assigned by the client. This ID will be used the server when sending gauge value updates to the client. The purpose of the ID is to make it easy for the client to implement a lookup array to update the physical gauges. A typical client would start assign IDs starting from 0 and then incrementing by one for each gauge that it has interest in.

The server will send to the client:
[source]
----
[3, [<id>, <indicatorstring>], [<id>, <indicatorstring>], ...]
----

Where:

<id>::
Is the ID given in the subscribe command

<indicatorstring>::
Is the text displayed on the indicator.

==== Example

The client subscribes to the output of the Hornet UFC scratchpad:

[source]
----
[3, 6, "UFC_ScratchPadNumberDisplay", 0]
----

Now the player types on the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 on the number pad of the UFC, which will
show the number on the scratch pad. The following is sent by the server to the client:

[source]
----
[3,[0,"       "]]
[3,[0,"      1"]]
[3,[0,"     12"]]
[3,[0,"    123"]]
[3,[0,"   1234"]]
[3,[0,"  12345"]]
[3,[0," 123456"]]
[3,[0,"1234567"]]
----

=== Command 5: List all indicators

Use this command to get a list of all indicators in the cockpit. See
link:hornetindicators.json[hornetindicators.json] for example of the
output. The actual output is in a more compact form without spaces.
The example has been formatted for readability.

The format of the command is:

[code]
----
[5]
----

See the above example for the format that the server replies with.

=== Example session

== Installation and usage

== How to add support for new aircraft

== Related projects

Commit message:

Changed to simple text lines instead of JSON

README.adoc, after:

= dcs-master - Digital Combat Simulator cockpit integration server

dcs-master is a plugin to 
https://www.digitalcombatsimulator.com[Digital Combat Simulator] that provides a network
socket through which aircraft gauge data and other information is exported and
through which aircraft instruments and controls can be controlled. This implementation
aims to achieve the following:

* It should be easy to add support for new aircraft without extensive coding. Most of the
  gauge (game output) and controls (input) are already described in the DCS game files in a structed
  machine readable format. This information is utilized as much as possible to avoid manual
  programming of the same information.
* A simple to use network protocol that can easily be integrated with various client software.
  This is achieved by sending all data as simple space separated text lines. Originally https://json.org[JSON] was used, but it
  turned out that text lines was sufficient and even simpler. JSON and other formats can easily be enabled if needed.
  If a more compact data format
  is needed, then support for http://cbor.io[CBOR] can easily be added, since JSON can be encoded
  as CBOR. Other compact formats could be used as well.
* Avoid sending more data than needed. This is achieved by allowing the client to request which
  parameters should be exported, at what maximum frequency and with which precision (per gauge).
  Data is only
  sent when the information changes at the requested precision. For example, the indicated
  airspeed (IAS) is within the game a floating point number that in practice changes for each
  rendered frame in the game. In most cases, it is sufficient for the client software to know
  the IAS without decimals, for example, at the resolution of 1 km/h or 1 knot. If the IAS stays
  with that one km/h then an update of the IAS is not sent to the client.
* Keep the server side implementation fairly simple.

== DCS cockpit information

Aircraft cockspits in DCS are described in the DCS installation folder 
(typically `C:\Program Files\Eagle Dynamics\DCS World\`) in the 
`Mods\aircraft\<aircraft name>\Cockpit\Scripts\` folder.

The cockpits consist of the following elements:

Devices::
The devices of the aircraft. Taking the F/A-18C as an example, separate devices are the Up Front Controller (UFC),
 the armament computer and the environmental control system. The devices are listed in the `devices.lua` file.
Commands::
The _devices_ are controlled via _commands_. Each device typically has several
commands. These represent the buttons and switches
on the devices. For example, the UFC has a number keyboard and several other
buttons. Each button is a command. The commands are listed in the `command_defs.lua` file.
The main panel::
The main panel is a also a device, but is special, in that it contains all
the gauge and other output information. This includes the position of knobs
and switches. There are no commands associated with the main panel device.
The main panel gauges are listed in the `mainpanel_init.lua` file which also
includes the `MainPanel\lamps.lua` file where on/off style indicators are listed. 
 
Devices and commands are numbered. The main panel is always device 0. So we have this structure:

* Devices
** Device 0: Main panel
*** Gauge 1
*** Gauge 2
*** Gauge n
** Device 1
*** Command 1
*** Command 2
*** Command n
** Device n
*** Command 1
*** ...

Internally to the game the status of all gauges and commands are represented
as floating point values between -1.0 and 1.0 inclusive.

== The protocol 

WARNING: The protocol is not fully finalized yet and changes may still occur.

The protocol works by sending and receiving space separated text lines terminated by a new line character. The lines are exchanged over a TCP/IP session. By default the DCS master server plugin listens to port 4242, but this can changed in the LUA script. The first element of the text line is always the associated command defined by an integer. The general format is:
[source]
----
<command> <arg1> <arg2> ... \n
----

Five _commands_ are currently implemented:

0:: The server reports the name of the currently controlled aircraft
1:: The client controls a device
2:: The client subscribes to gauge value changes, and the server sends gauge values
3:: The client subscribes to indicators (text output, which cannot be represented as number), and the server sends indicator values
4:: The client requests a list of all known indicators, and the server responds with the indicators

=== Command 0: Report currently controlled aircraft

Command 0 is automatically sent by the server to the client:

* Immediately when the client connects if an aircraft is controlled
* Immediately when the controlled aircraft changes

The format of the command is:
[source]
----
0 <aircraft>
----
The aircraft name is always as defined by DCS.

For example, when the the F/A-18C is controlled, the following is sent by the server to the client:
[source]
----
0 FA-18C_hornet
----

===  Command 1: Control a device

With command 1 you control devices in the aircraft, like pushing a button, flicking a switch, turning a knob or pulling a lever. The format of the command is:

[source]
----
1 <device> <command> <value>
----
Where:

<device> and <command>::
_Device_ and _command_ can either take an integer form or a string form. The integer form always works for any aircraft and for every device and command. This way any aircraft now and in the future can be controlled without any updates to the server software. To find the right device and command numbers, look in the DCS aircraft folder in the `devices.lua` and `command_defs.lua` files. To use the string form, the device and/or command must be defined in the aircraft specific JSON file in the dcs-master folder. To find the correct device and command names, look in this JSON file. The strings are not case sensitive, so you can capitalize them as you see fit. The names used are always as defined by DCS, even if they contain typos (as has happened), or if they are non-descriptive like "Button_42".
_<value>_::
The _value_ is always a floating point value between -1.0 and 1.0 inclusive. The value to send can most often be easily determined:

** On/off switches are 0, 1 and tri-state (down/middle/up) switches are -1, 0, 1.
** Multi-position rotational knobs are fractional numbers for the various positions _(Information on how to determine the fractions will be added.)_
** Encoders are fractional numbers of the amount to turn; positive for clockwise and negative for counter-clockwise 
** Analog controls can use the whole floating point range

==== Examples

To press and release the TCN button on the UFC in the F/A-18C, send:

[source]
----
1 UFC FuncSwTCN 1
1 UFC FuncSwTCN 0
----

To increase the RADAR altimeter warning position on the right vertical panel in the F/A-18C, send:

[source]
----
1 ID2163A ID2163A_SetMinAlt 0.05
----

And to decrease it:
[source,json]
----
1 ID2163A ID2163A_SetMinAlt -0.05
----

_Example of multi-position switch and other examples will be added._


=== Command 2: Subscribe to gauge values

With command 2 you subscribe the changes in the values of gauges, and receive the updated gauge values from the server. An update of the value of the gauge is sent by the server to the client when either of the following conditions occur:

* Immediately after the subscribe command has been sent by the client to the server, so the client gets a starting point
* When a value changes with the requested precision _and_ no more often than at the requested frequency

Note that gauges are any kind of indicators that can be represented by a numerical value. This includes on/off lights, analog gauges and digitally displayed values. 

==== Client to server

The format of the command is:
[source]
----
2 <gaugename> <id> <precision> <maxfrequency>
----

Where:

<gaugename>::
The _gauge name_ can either take an integer form or a string form. The integer form always works for any aircraft and for every gauge. This way you can receive gauge information for any aircraft now and in the future without any updates to the server software. To use the string form, the device and/or command must be defined in the aircraft specific JSON file in the dcs-master folder. To find the correct device and command names, look in this JSON file. The strings are not case sensitive, so you can capitalize them as you see fit. The names used are always as defined by DCS, even if they contain typos.
<id>::
The _ID_ is an arbitrary integer number assigned by the client. This ID will be used the server when sending gauge value updates to the client. The purpose of the ID is to make it easy for the client to implement a lookup array to update the physical gauges. A typical client would start assign IDs starting from 0 and then incrementing by one for each gauge that it has interest in.
<precision>::
The _precision_ is an integer number defining with how many decimals precision the client is interested in receiving updates. This has an effect on both the update frequency and the precision in which the value is returned. The default value precision is 0, meaning whole integers. A precision of 1 decimal, means that an update is sent of the value changes by 0.1 or more; A precision of 2, means changes of 0.01 or more and so on. Negative numbers are also allowed. For example -1, means to report changes of 10 or more.
<maxfrequency>::
The _maximum frequency_ defines the maximum frequency at which an update will be sent. The default value is 10, i.e., an update is sent _at most_ ten times per second. If the value has not changed by more than the requested _precision_, then an update will not be sent no matter what the _maximum frequency_ is set at.

Both _<precision>_ and _<maxfrequency>_ are optional, but to set _<maxfrequency>_ you must also set _<precision>_. Most often you would keep _<maxfrequency>_ the same for all gauges in your cockpit and only change the _<precision>_ depending on the gauge type.

==== Server to client

Format:
[source]
----
2 <id> <rawvalue> <gaugevalue>
----

_Description will come._


=== Command 4: Subscribe to indicators

Indicators are gauges that and screens that show output that shows text and cannot be represented by numbers, for example the output on a text display. Indicators grouped
hierarchically within DCS. At the highest level are numbers, representing a device
within the cockpit. The device can several displays. For example, in the Hornet,
the UFC is device number 6, and the UFC has several displays. For an example of
all indicators of the Hornet see link:hornetindicators.json[hornetindicators.json].

If you don't know the number and name of the indicator you need, you can send 
command 5, explained later.

The format of the command is:
[source]
----
3 <indicatornumber> <indicatorname> <id>
----

Where:

<indicator_number>::
The indicator number of the device.

<indicatorname>::
The name of the indicator. Although the indicators are in a hierarchy, the 
indicator name is just the name of the actual indicator, without any intermediates.
For example the UFC scratch pad displays is on indicator device 6 and the full hierarchy
is UFC_MainDummy -> UFC_mask -> UFC_ScratchPadNumberDisplay. To get this value, you would
use an <indicatorname> of "UFC_ScratchPadNumberDisplay"

<id>::
The _ID_ is an arbitrary integer number assigned by the client. This ID will be used the server when sending gauge value updates to the client. The purpose of the ID is to make it easy for the client to implement a lookup array to update the physical gauges. A typical client would start assign IDs starting from 0 and then incrementing by one for each gauge that it has interest in.

The server will send to the client:
[source]
----
3 <id> <indicatorstring>
----

Where:

<id>::
Is the ID given in the subscribe command

<indicatorstring>::
Is the text displayed on the indicator.

==== Example

The client subscribes to the output of the Hornet UFC scratchpad:

[source]
----
3 6 UFC_ScratchPadNumberDisplay 0
----

Now the player types on the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 on the number pad of the UFC, which will
show the number on the scratch pad. The following is sent by the server to the client:

[source]
----
3 0        
3 0       1
3 0      12
3 0     123
3 0    1234
3 0   12345
3 0  123456
3 0 1234567
----

=== Command 5: List all indicators

Use this command to get a list of all indicators in the cockpit. See
link:hornetindicators.json[hornetindicators.json] for example of the
output. The actual output is in a more compact form without spaces.
The example has been formatted for readability.

The format of the command is:

[code]
----
4
----

See the above example for the format that the server replies with.

=== Example session

== Installation and usage

== How to add support for new aircraft

== Related projects
